# Data Modeling with Postgres

## Introduction

A company wants to analyze the data they've been collecting on songs and user activity on their music streaming app. The analytics team is particularly interested in understanding what songs users are listening to. Currently, their data resides in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.

In this project, we apply data modeling techniques with Postgres and build an ETL pipeline using Python. We define fact and dimension tables for a star schema for a particular analytic focus, and write an ETL pipeline that transfers data from files in two local directories into these tables in Postgres using Python and SQL. 


## Datasets
### Song Dataset

The first dataset is a subset of real data from the Million Song Dataset. Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. 

Example of what a single song file looks like:

{"num_songs": 1, "artist_id": "ARJIE2Y1187B994AB7", "artist_latitude": null, "artist_longitude": null, "artist_location": "", "artist_name": "Line Renaud", "song_id": "SOUPIRU12A6D4FA1E1", "title": "Der Kleine Dompfaff", "duration": 152.92036, "year": 0}

### Log Dataset

The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate activity logs from a music streaming app based on specified configurations.

Example of what the data in a log file looks like:

{"artist": null, "auth": "Logged In", "firstName": "Walter", "gender": "M", "itemInSession": 0, "lastName": "Frye", "length": null, "level": "free", "location": "San Francisco-Oakland-Hayward, CA", "method": "GET","page": "Home", "registration": 1540919166796.0, "sessionId": 38, "song": null, "status": 200, "ts": 1541105830796, "userAgent": "\"Mozilla\/5.0 (Macintosh; Intel Mac OS X 10_9_4) AppleWebKit\/537.36 (KHTML, like Gecko) Chrome\/36.0.1985.143 Safari\/537.36\"", "userId": "39"}

## Schema
### Fact Table
**songplays**: records in log data associated with song plays i.e. records with page NextSong
```songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent```

### Dimension Tables

**users**: users in the app
```user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level```

**songs**: songs in music database
```song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration```

**artists**: artists in music database
```artist_id, name, location, latitude, longitude```

**time**: timestamps of records in songplays broken down into specific units
```start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday```


## Project Files

**create_tables.py**: sets up database. Run this file to reset tables before each time you run the ETL scripts. Running this file creates **sparkifydb** and also creates the fact and dimension tables.

**sql_queries.py**: contains all the SQL queries for dropping and creating fact and dimension tables. Also, contains insertion query template.

**etl.ipynb**: reads and processes a single file from **song_data** and **log_data** and loads the data into the tables. This notebook contains detailed instructions on the ETL process for each of the tables. 

**etl.py**: read and process files from **song_data** and **log_data** and loads them into the tables.

**test.ipynb**: a Jypyter Notebook to connect to postgres db and validate the data loaded. Itdisplays the first few rows of each table to lets check the database.

## How to run

The ```create_tables.py``` and ```etl.py``` file have to be run independently as below:
```
python create_tables.py 
python etl.py 
```

## Reference: 
[Pandas Documentation](https://pandas.pydata.org/pandas-docs/stable/)

[PostgreSQL Documentation](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/)

[Psycopg](http://initd.org/psycopg/docs/)

